Questions and Answers :

What is ICS?
ICS is Institute Counselling Service at IIT Kanpur
The Institute Counselling Service is your home away from home. We are a team of professional counsellors, empathetic students and faculty advisors to assist you emotionally and academically

How to contact ICS?
The Institute Counselling Service
House No. 503
Type V
IIT Kanpur
208016
Office Timings:
11:00 AM - 7:00 PM (Mon to Fri)
Phone:
+91 512 2597784
Email:
head_cs@iitk.ac.in (Head, Institute Counselling Service)
counselor@iitk.ac.in (Appointments)

How to reach ICS?
The Institute Counselling Service
House No. 503
Type V
IIT Kanpur
208016
Office Timings:
11:00 AM - 7:00 PM (Mon to Fri)
Phone:
+91 512 2597784
Email:
head_cs@iitk.ac.in (Head, Institute Counselling Service)
counselor@iitk.ac.in (Appointments)

What is Counselling?
Counselling is not the same as giving advice. It is quite different from the general opinion held by people. Going for a counselling session in no way indicates that you are helpless or incapable of solving your problems. By talking about your problems or concerns with a counsellor you will deepen your understanding of your problem and develop the means to deal with them. We are happy to talk over any of your problems and with your agreement may refer you to other sources who might be able to help better such as psychiatrists or doctors.

Do I have to pay for Counselling?
All registered undergraduate and postgraduate students can avail the service free of cost. The expenditure involved if you wish to see the psychiatrist is also borne by the service.

How do I contact the Institute Counselling Service team?
You can contact the team members by seeing us in person, making a telephone call or mail-anything you are comfortable with. The Institute Counselling Service
House No. 503
Type V
IIT Kanpur
208016
Office Timings:
11:00 AM - 7:00 PM (Mon to Fri)
Phone:
+91 512 2597784
Email:
head_cs@iitk.ac.in (Head, Institute Counselling Service)
counselor@iitk.ac.in (Appointments)

What do I say?
It doesn't really matter how you present your problem.You can say whatever you like. Sometimes there is silence, sometimes you might find yourself saying things you had not expected to say. The counsellor will help you explore the matter and will keep referring to you to clarify his/her understanding.

What kind of problems can I talk to a counsellor about?
You can come to us for academic problems, emotional issues, career awareness and financial difficulties. These may include stress related problems, exam anxiety, personal problems and career related queries.

What will the counsellor think of me - will they think badly of me for getting into a mess?
Many of our problems arise just because we are human.We all make mistakes and have to learn from them, and it is normal to need several goes before we get something right. No. Counselling is based in the belief that most people naturally strive to make the best use of themselves. When something goes wrong, it is usually because we are pushing ourselves too hard; because we are in a muddle for reasons we don't fully understand or because we are actually are suffering some form of mental distress which is distorting our view of reality. Therefore judging is not helpful or relevant; they need to be supported in finding their own way out of the problem.

How can it be right to be in need of help?
We all make mistakes and have to learn from them, and it is normal to need several goes before we get something right. Needing help is a normal part of this process. You could only label it as failure if you had already decided you must succeed entirely on our own - which is not a burden you have to impose on yourself. If you think you've failed, the counsellor might help you see that this is not all there is to it.

Doesn't asking for counselling mean admitting failure?
Paradoxically it can be seen as a matter of strength to ask for counselling. Many people think that they are being strong in not seeking help whereas in fact those who can admit to their difficulties could be considered the strong ones. Asking for counselling often mean you have taken the first difficult step on the road to resolving the problem.

What if I still feel ashamed of my problems?
Counsellors do accept that it is natural to want to appear successful and that most of us feel some shame when we have problems and so don't want to advertise our difficulties. This is one of the reasons we place a great emphasis on confidentiality.

How confidential is counselling?
Strict confidentiality is ensured in the Institute Counselling Service.

If I have had counselling, does it go on my record?
If a student approaches the Institute Counselling Service, nothing about it will go on his record.

Does it work for everybody?
No, but it seems to offer at least some help to the majority so is worth a try.

Is counselling like psychiatry?
Counselling bears little relation to psychiatry except that both deal with emotional and mental processes. Psychiatrist are trained doctors, who work largely through diagnosis of illness and then by prescribing a treatment - usually involving medication. Counsellors are normally non-medical personnel who work by talking and encouraging you to find your own solutions. Counsellors can however recognize the symptoms of severe mental distress, and may suggest you to consider medical help if seems appropriate.

Can I seek advice regarding a friend or colleague?
If you want to approach us regarding a friend, you are most welcome. We'll try our best to help you in helping your friend.

What exactly is a remedial class?
Remedial Classes are meant to clarify the basic concepts. It is possible that all intricacies and details as taught by the professor are not taught. However the underlying concepts are fully covered in a much simpler manner, on the basis of which further study can be done.

Oh great! So its okay if I don't attend lectures. right?
No, the remedial class are just a help provided when there is difficulty in grasping the concepts in college lectures. They may not cover the entire syllabus(only the difficult parts) and are sometimes not as regular as college lectures.

When can I approach the mentor?
Anytime, when the mentor is free. It depends on mutual understanding between the mentor and student. The mentor can be contacted via phone or other means, and unless he is in the middle of something very important, he is willing to help out.

Only weak students attend remedial classes...
Not at all! It is always possible to miss out on certain concepts while in class or during self study and the academic load may make us all feel pressurized at times. Therefore, asking for help doesn't undermine your intelligence or your capabilities, but only demonstrates your willingness to learn.

Who can apply for scholarships?
Students of only UG and M.Sc. programs can apply for scholarships. Other programs are not eligible for scholarships.

Who can apply for Students' Benevolence Fund?
Students who are unable to get financial support from the institute or from any other source.

What are the criteria for getting SBF scholarship?
The following criteria are evaluated for awarding SBF scholarships:

Parental income
CPI
Student should not be getting financial support from any other source
How do I apply for SBF scholarships?
Students can apply for SBF by filling an online form which is circulated by the Institute Counselling Service around mid-September. Whenever the form link is active, a mail is sent to the students' mailing list.

What are some other scholarships which I can get apart from SBF?
You can get Merit-cum-Means scholarship, Sports scholarship, various Donor Departmental scholarships, and Basic Mess & Pocket Allowance.

Coming to IITK
Q. When do I have to report to IITK? Can I report late? Also, can I go back after reporting and come back before classes commence?
Ans. The Reporting date for the new UG students will be updated soon. You have to report to your allotted hall in IITK. The Hall Allotment list will be up on website before arrival.
NO, you cannot report late. You have to report in IITK only on the aforementioned time and date. If you are reporting late then you should inform the counselling service with a valid reason.
NO, you cannot go home after reporting.There are a lot of activities scheduled before the classes commences.

Q. How can I reach IITK? Is there any special provision for the students to reach there?
Ans. AIR Route: Kanpur airport is now functional. Direct flights are available between Kanpur(KNU) and Delhi(DEL), Bengaluru(BLR), and Mumbai(BOM). Nearest airport is Lucknow: You may catch a taxi from airport (easily available for IITK),it ll be a 2-3 hours journey costing about Rs 1400-1800.
Train Route : IITK is a 45 minutes journey from Kanpur Central Railway Station. You can traverse the route either by Auto-Rickshaws which are easily available, by Institute buses depending on the timing, or by hiring cabs. Also,there would be a help desk of Counselling Service, IIT Kanpur arranged at Kanpur station. You can contact them for institute buses or for hiring autos and cabs.
Additionally, look at the Reaching IITK section on the website.

  Things to bring to IITK
Q. What documents do I have to bring to IITK before leaving home?
Ans. A checklist of all documents is provided Document Checklist Section in "NEW UNDERGRADUATE IMPORTANT INFORMATION"

Q. Do I have to bring something for day to day living purposes?
Ans. You may bring items for day to day living purposes, but almost everything is available to purchase in the campus including mattresses, buckets, locks.
Also, Online delivery systems can be used to deliver stuff till your hall gate. So there's no need to worry about availiblity to things.
Please click here to get the list of items you may need.

  Orientation Programme
Q. What is Orientation Programme? Is it compulsory to attend it?
Ans. The Orientation Program is designed to acquaint the Freshers with the Campus, and the various activities in it. It is a comprehensive introduction to your life for the whole stay at the campus. Yes, The Orientation Programme is compulsory to attend.

  Academics and Scholarships
Q. What is the medium of instruction in IITK?
Ans. English is the medium of all official instruction (lectures, labs, assignments and exams). For students who might be uncomfortable with English, the institute offers a basic course in the english language which is taught in the first semester. Also, English Conversation Classes are organised to help the students in English language.

Q. How is the general lecture environment? Can I ask a doubt to a professor?
Ans. The general lecture environment varies from professor to professor, but asking doubts during lectures is always allowed. However, tutorials are better places for clearing doubts as they have a much higher level of personal interaction.

Q. Are there any scholarships available? If yes, how can I get them?
Ans. There are ample number of scholarships available.You will get to know about these and how to apply for them after you reach here.For any of these, Parental Income proof is must.
Please go through the SSPC Website and Under-Graduate section under the important info tab on this website for further details.

  Branch Change
Q. Does IITK have Branch Change policies?
Ans. Yes, you can change your branch at the end of 2nd, 3rd or 4th semester, but only once in total. No programme related restrictions are present, i.e. change from a BS program to BTech, Btech to BS, BS to BS or BTech to BTech, all are allowed.

Q. On what basis my branch can get changed?
Ans. Please go to the Under-Graduate section under the Important Info tab on this website.

  Facilities in Hostels
Q. What are Halls of Residence?
Ans. Halls of residences are the hostels where you will be residing during your stay at IIT Kanpur. There are five halls for boy UG students (Hall of Residence: 2, 3, 5, 12 and 13) and two for girl UG students (Hall of Residence: 4 and 6). UG first year students will stay in Hall 13 (boys) and Hall 4 (girls).

Q. What are the facilities available at Halls of Residence?
Ans. Each hall has its mess, canteen, photocopying facility, and a shop for basic daily needs, other than the rooms.
They also have their own Reading Room, Computer Centre, which is open 24*7.
Every hall have their own sports equipments with some sports fields available 24*7. Every hall has its Basketball Court, Badminton Court and Table Tennis room.

Q. When will I be assigned my hall and room? Can I select my room, hall and room partner?
Ans. Refer to the hall allocation part in the left sidebar

Q. How many students I have to share my room with?
Ans. You will have to share your room with one or two more people.

Q. What items will be available to me in my room?
Ans. In Hall 4, your rooms will have two beds, one mirror, two almirahs, chairs, tables, and a rack
In Hall 13(double room), a room has 2 beds, 1 almirah with a mirror, 1 table, 1 chair, 1 bed-table and 1 notice board.
In Hall 13(triple room), a room has 3 beds, 2 almirah with two mirrors, 2 tables, 2 chairs, 1 bed-table and 2 notice boards.

  Hall Competitions
Q. What are inter-hall competitions? Can I participate?
Ans. To encourage participation in extracurricular activities, various inter-hall competitions are organized. Each hall is a part of a pool. There are four pools. Following are the interhall events-
Freshers Inferno - Games & Sports (open for both UG & PG Freshers )
Takneek - Science & Technology
Galaxy - Media & Cultural
Inferno - Games & Sports
All the events are open for freshers. At the end of the academic year the performances of each pool in all competitions are combined to give the ranking for the General Championship.

  General Queries
Q. Can I bring my laptop/pc?
Ans. Freshers are enscouraged to bring their laptops to college if they already have one. The main Computer Centre and the computer lab at New Core Labs are open till 2 am in the night and are good enough for all practical purposes.

Q. What are the facilities available in the campus area?
Ans. There is a shopping center, commonly known as ShopC, in the campus for general items and commodities. It has a campus restaurant, Stationery shops, barber shop, cycle repairing shop, bakery shops, laundry shop and general stores.
The bank facilities are available within the campus. There are SBI and UBI bank branches available in the campus. Campus also have a automated ICICI branch. SBI, UBI and ICICI ATMs are also available in the campus.
DOAA Canteen is functional 24*7.
There is a Food Court in the campus area in SAC (Student Activity Corner) which are available from 2pm to 2 am. It has Dominos, Kathi Rolls, Chocolate Room, Wazwan food outlets. There is also a subsidized Cafe Coffee Day outlet. And not to forget a chaat corner in front of hall 3.
There's a canteen available in every hall available from 2pm to 2 am.

Q. What books and other class material do I have to bring?
Ans. Practically none. There is no course-related book that you have to bring. The course books can be taken from seniors or issued from the library. Also, the reference section of the library is equipped with sufficient copies of the course books, so one can easily use them there, if in case you feel the need to buy one, then there are bookshops in the shopping center inside the campus. The general books used in the first year are Thomas  Calculus, D J Griffiths Electrodynamics,Mechanics by Kleppner, any C Programming Language Book. Also Chemistry Labcoat and Mini Drafter for Engineering Drawing Lab are also required in first year courses. If you already have above mentioned items you can bring these with you otherwise do not buy them you can take it here from the seniors or shops.

Q. What about Ragging practices in the hostels?
Ans. We are a Ragging Free campus. Strict actions are taken against those indulge in ragging. Every student signs an anti ragging affidavit.
Anti-Ragging Squads are also made to check its practise anywhere.

Q. Will parents be provided accommodation ?
Ans. No, parents will not be provided any accommodation in the campus. A list of hotels in Kanpur is provided in this pdf : [Hotels]

Q. How big is the campus ? How to travel inside the campus ?
Ans. IITK has a humongous campus size of 1055 acres. Students are not allowed to drive motorized vehicles. IITK being an environment friendly campus, everyone travels by bicycles. Many professors prefer riding cycles as well. Other means of transport are cycle rickshaws, which are usually available throughout the day. Motorized rickshaws or tempos may also be available sometimes on campus.
Differently abled students shall be provided with hybrid scooters or tricycles.

Q. Is laundry service available to the students?
Ans. Yes, there is laundry service available to the students. The laundry serviceman shall visit your room twice a week. The basic monthly cost shall be around Rs.200. All the halls have Washing Machines installed.

Q. Is there any Internet connectivity for the freshers ?
Ans. The freshers have full freedom to use wi-fi services in the academic area. The computer centres in halls provide internet connectivity 24/7. The computer centres in the academic area are open till 2am.

Q. What is the fee structure ? What are the modes of payment available for the Institute fees as well as the mess fee ?
Ans. Fee structure is decided by DOSA(Dean of Student Affairs) Office.It keeps on changing subject to various conditons. Modes of payment are- DEMAND DRAFT or ONLINE via SBI I-Collect/AXIS bank /ICICI bank gateway.

Q. How many semesters are there in an year ? How are the semesters divided over the year ?
Ans. >2 semesters are held per year. The first semester commences at the end of july and ends in the month of november, then a one month break in december. The next semester commences by the end of december and ends by the month of april.

Q. Is there any Hospital on the campus ? What facilities are available over there ?
Ans. IITK has its own Health Center (HC).HC has four ambulances. It takes care about all the basic health related issues as well as emergency conditions. Also,there are dispensaries available in some specific halls.

Q. Where can I get the leave calendar for the year ?
Ans. Every detail is available on the academic calendar including midsem breaks and holidays. It will be provided soon.

Q. Are there any facilities available for the physically handicapped on the campus ?
Ans. Yes, differently abled students shall be allowed hybrid scooters or tricycles. There are ramps available wherever necessary to make life easier for them.